Ex4 — SQL-RAG Pipeline Walkthrough
One question, traced end to end.

A user asks "which candidates have Kubernetes experience?" The question arrives at POST /api/chat
with the conversation history attached. The orchestrator calls LLM #1 (Nova Lite, sql-v1.txt) with
the DB schema and a few worked SQL examples as a system prompt, and the question as a user message —
this is the few-shot call whose job is to produce raw SQL. The model returns something like:

  SELECT DISTINCT c.id, c.full_name
  FROM candidates c
  JOIN candidate_skills cs ON cs.candidate_id = c.id
  WHERE cs.name ILIKE '%kubernetes%'
  LIMIT 100

Before that SQL touches the database, the safety guard checks it deterministically: it must start
with SELECT or WITH, contain no forbidden keywords (INSERT, DROP, SET, PRAGMA…), and have no
semicolons. It also appends LIMIT 100 if the model omitted it. No LLM is involved in this check —
it is a pure code gate. If any check fails, the query is rejected immediately with status "unsafe";
no DB call is made, and the conversation returns HTTP 200 with a diagnostic the UI can display.

Assuming the query passes, the executor opens a separate isolated Postgres connection (not the
shared request session), sets READ ONLY and a 5-second statement_timeout, and runs the SQL. Even
if a write somehow slipped past the guard, the DB would refuse it at the transaction level — the
executor is a second independent safety layer. The executor returns structured rows:

  [{"id": "cv_001", "full_name": "Alice Tester"}, {"id": "cv_002", "full_name": "Bob Tester"}]

These rows are serialized as JSON and injected directly into the LLM #2 prompt (answer-v1.txt). The
system instruction says "use ONLY the rows below, never invent data", and those rows are the only
candidate data the model sees in this call — it has no access to the database, no other context, no
general knowledge about the candidates. The conversation history is passed as real alternating
user/assistant message turns, so a follow-up like "which of those are senior?" resolves "those"
correctly. The final answer — "Two candidates have Kubernetes experience: Alice Tester and Bob
Tester." — can only name people who appear in the retrieved rows. That is the grounding guarantee.

Every turn, regardless of outcome (success, unsafe, sql_error, llm_error), writes a query_runs row
with the question, generated SQL, status, token counts, and latency. This is the observability
record that proves the loop ran and what it produced.
